---
layout: default
title: Gunn Peak
author: Michael Schmitz
category: outdoors
---

Switchbacks are for hikers. After hours of grueling mountaineering straight
toward the summit, we finally reached the lower-Gunn area. Hiking with a full
pack reminded us of our years in prison. We never really were incarcerated, but
we're sure that being tied to a ball-and-chain must feel like our trek. After
dropping our packs, our energy renewed. I convinced Micah to climb Schmitz Peak
(5860). Schmitz is approachable from most sides. We hiked up the Eastern
ridge--the ridge that travels to 5760, the peak strewn with broken plan parts.
The summit register was soaking wet, and the original paper was an amorphous
paper blob. I found a note left by my father and brother however, so we dried
off the paper and the cannister. After it dried, we left a note and a sign
denoting the point's true name: Schmitz Peak.

On the way down, we found a better campsite. Lakes clearly spot the landscape
earlier in the season, but when we were there, water was scarce. The other
campsite not only boasted flatter, softer ground, however, but a small pond lay
mere steps away. True the water looked intimidating, but we had much faith in
our water filter. I'm still alive, and I haven't heard any news about Micah's
death.

By this time Micah began to feel the long day wear on him, but I still bursted
with energy. I scrambled up 5400, the peak between Schmitz and Gunn. I
approached from the South, and it seems that this was the easiest direction.
Nonetheless, the very summit proved slightly troublesome--steep rock composed
the top. From the summit, I viewed climbers struggling up Gunn. Unfortunately,
I never spoke with them. They spent the night, but I have no idea where. I
searched all over.

By this time the weather had cooled off and both of us began to hunger, or
maybe starve. So we heated up Chili and sipped our coronas. In hindsight,
hefting up 4 lbs of chili and beer probably was not the best idea, it made a
memorable dinner. The weather showed no signs of trouble, so we ignored the
forecast and spent the night under the stars. We both awoke dewy but at the
same time glad we hadn't troubled with the tent.

The dew did not trouble us in the morning, however. We awoke at 4:00 AM in
aspiration of summitting Gunn before dawn. The moon, although less than half
full and waining, provided excellent light. By moonlight and headlamp-light we
circumnavigated 5400 to the West, descended into shadows on the Northern side,
and then reemerged into the moonlight at the base of Gunn. We quickly scrambled
up the mountain and made it in time. I have no recollection of ever seeing a
dawn before, and from the highest peak for miles around I cannot believe that I
will ever forget the experience.

Few people climb the mountain. The summit register dates far back. In fact, it
may be the original register. I had climbed the mountain more than two months
past, and my name lay on the previous page. However, the register only has a
few more pages left. One interesting log was the "Heinz Groupe." They seem to
summit once a year, and others commented on their presence or on the fact that
they missed the "Heinz Groupe." Hopefully I can discover who these people are.

On the way down, I left a note at the rope. Hopefully the climbers email me, as
I would like to ask them some questions about their climb. Hopefully the are
not bitter about being woken at 4:00 in the morning. They may have slept around
Gunn.

Micah and I headed back to camp, but I wandered around. First I summitted 5760.
The very top is most approachable from the northern side, although the ascent
is also possible from the Southeast. Debris from the plane crash exists
directly below the summit rock. The crash must have been terrifying and tragic;
had the plan been fifty feet higher it would have skirted around the mountain.
The pilot may even have avoided the mountain if he had been slightly left or
right. Certainly there were no survivors, as some plane parts scattered down
the mountain hundreds of feet. They are visible from the trail, glinting in the
sun.

Shortly after returning to camp, I spotted some people and ran down to ask if
they were the climbers. Disappointed with their response, I raced back up to
camp, packed up, and we headed down to Gunn Lake. Our 'beach' turned out to be
cracked, dry dirt and the more insects populated the region, but overall both
of us were glad we shifted camp. The lake deepened very quickly and quite
substantially; it even contained fish!

Micah had injured his ankle, and I knew that we would not summit Merchant, so I
had to summit Gunshy. I climbed up a dry streambed along the forested western
ridge of the mountain. The ascent proved fairly easy, although during most of
the year I believe one would want to ascent far to the East. Next time I would
try scrambling up just to the West of the point closest to Gunshy along the
ridge, and then I would climb the ridge to the West. The middle of the mountain
is spotted with cliffs, and although an ascent may be possible at parts, a
descent would be tricky.

Regardless, my way worked at the time. After a while, I realized I had a mere
ten minute to go. Then, all of a sudden, I saw four mountain goats. Two young
Goats elegantly leaped up the mountain toward the summit. Another goat lay with
its child. In awe and fear, I shot several pictures. Then the parent rose and
left its child--it had clearly noticed my presence. I turned around and quickly
walked away. Then I hear rockfall substantially closer to me. I broke into a
run until I felt safe. Seeing no way up the mountain other than through the
mountain goats, I decided I should turn back, especially because I was along.
The mountain goats chased me down the mountain.

Back at the campsite I went for a swim and then blindly cut my hair with a
pocket knife. The trip could not have been better, but I was wiped. Micah and I
wolfed down a dinner and then fell asleep by 8:30. We did not awake until long
after dawn.

The route down proved rather eventless. We stopped in one of the endless
huckleberry fields that cover the alpine region and picked a few liters. I
continued the blueberry/huckleberry debate (I swear that some were blueberries)
but Micah proved himself a die-hard huckleberry maniac. He wouldn't budge an
inch.

Farther down the trail Micah decided to decent down a steep chute that clearly
wasn't the trail. But after a few falls we traversed back and found ourselves
on the trail. After another long day, we enjoyed our ginger ale stashed in the
creek and drove down the mountain, leaving behind one of the greatest weekends
in my life.
