---
layout: default
title: Soap
author: Michael Schmitz
category: projects
---

# Liquid Walnut Soap

I wanted to use up some old walnut oil, and my walnut bar soap never turned out very well, so I wanted to make some liquid walnut soap.  I based this recipe on [this post](https://www.reddit.com/r/soapmaking/comments/194p543/linseed_oil_liquid_soap/) and validated the ratios against a few other sources.

* 500 g walnut oil
* 194.5 g KOH
* 418 g H20

Combine the lye and oil at 170-175 degrees Fahrenheit.  [This blog](https://www.ellyseveryday.com/ellys-everyday-blog/liquid-castile-soap-recipe-100-percent-olive-oil) has some good details about making liquid oil soap.

# Black Tea Soap

I wanted to use up some Camelia oil I had bought for protecting tools from
rust, but it dried into a film making a mess.  Black tea soap was the obvious
option.

* 12 oz of black tea (I used 6 tbs black tea)
* 12 oz coconut oil
* 12 oz camelia oil
* 2 oz beeswax
* 6 oz walnut oil
* 4.55 oz lye (129 g)

I mixed when the oil was around 130F and the lye was around 120F.  The soap traced quickly (~10 minutes) with some whisking and sirring and gelled overnight.

# Pork Soap

## Pine Tar Edition

I modified the original recipe slightly to add some pine tar into the mix.  I
used a calculator at soapee.com to create a 4% superfat recipe.

* 11.5 oz water
* 30 oz lard
* 3 oz pine tar
* 4.19 oz NaOH

The first batch we made failed terribly.  We added the fat and lye around 160F
while stirring with a spatula, and it immediately turned grainy--a condition I
think is called ricing.  With further mixing it only got worse, and when let
sit for a few minutes oil would puddle out.  It's destined for the trash.

We think the sapponification reaction happened too quickly, and learned that
many people mix the oil and water at a much lower temperature.  We tried it
again  with the oil around 95F and the lye around 85F, mixing rapidly with a
whisk as they were combined.  The result was a beautiful texture that traced
nicely and poured easily into molds.

## Original

We made a 100% lard soap with 3-5% superfat. Calculators, SAP ratio, and lard content all vary, so we looked at multiple sources and settled on the ratio 90 oz lard to 12.05 oz lye. We wanted about 35% water relative to oil, but this measurement is less critical. We Scaled down the recipe to a 4 lb batch by lard:

* 64 oz rendered pork lard (back fat)
* 22.4 oz water
* 8.58 oz NOH (lye)

This produced about 160 cubic inches of soap.  It fit perfectly in our two smaller soap boxes.

# Walnut Castile Soap

## Second Attempt

On our second attempt, we targeted 2% lye discount whereas our first attempt
was closer to a 7% lye discount.

* 54 oz walnut oil (Mike Mahoney)
* 10 oz beeswax
* 7.63 oz lye
* 20 oz water
* 2 tbsp walnut dye

## First Attempt

I had to find a use for some excess walnut oil so I made some soap.

* 90 oz walnut oil (La Tourangelle)
* 11.12 oz lye
* 0.82 oz KOH
* 30 oz water
* 1 tablespoonh salt
* 1/2 tsp walnut dye

Dissolve salt in the water and then add the lye and KOH.  One stirred and
dissolved, mix in the dye and cool to 150F.  Meanwhile heat the oil to 160F.
When both solution are at temperature add the lye to the oil and stir until
cream, homogeneous, and traced (we used a stick blender to speed up the
process).

### Notes

Next time we might use 1 tsp dye for a darker color.  The soap had a pleasant
color and fragrance, but was too soft and oily.  After a year some oil
separated out into the box we were storing the soap in.  Next time we would
certainly use a bit more lye to cut down on the excess oil.

# Beeswax Olive Soap (Wedding Soap)

* 26 oz olive oil
* 4 oz beeswax
* 2 oz palm oil
* 4.2 oz lye
* 16 oz water
