---
layout: default
title: Three Fingers
author: Michael Schmitz
category: outdoors
---

Despite our early start (we woke up in Everett at 5:00 AM, August 23rd, to the
deafening chimes of Pink Floyd's "Time"), we didn't make it on the road until
six, and since we missed the turn off the first time, we didn't make it to the
trailhead until 8. When looking for the Forest Route 41 turnoff from Mountain
Loop Highway, realize that the sign actually says "Green Mountain Road." The
"Route 41" sign comes later.

The hike went much faster than anticipated. After an hour we reached Saddle
Lake, a 1000 ft elevation gain. In the next hour we matched that distance and
reached Goat Flats. The trees broke away and opened up into a beautiful rocky
meadow with a variety of mountain flowers. Fortunately, the prior good weather
kept Goat Flats from living up to its nickname, Goat Floats. But, as the same
internet website stated, there were definitely plenty of marmots.

The bulk of the hike existed between Goat Flats and the summit. After Goat
Flats the trail winded behind some peaks, facing out near Pilchuck.
Unfortunately the weather could have been better, but the sunny patches
followed us around: we saw Three Fingers on the way up and Pilchuck on the way
down. When we approached the glacier, Three Fingers stood boldly above,
majestically reigning over their territory.

On approaching the glacier, there existed two paths: a low path and a high
path. On several recommendations, I took the high path. Soon thereafter I
observed that the low route required a steep climb in the snow, which looked
less than ideal. I believe we could have made the snowy trek without ice axes,
but they definitely came in good use. I definitely could tell that they would
be needed through most of the year.

Near the top we approached our final snowfield. The trail dwindled and soon
disappeared, so we scrambled toward the summit shack. People exaggerated the
ladders and ropes, and the sheer cliffs from the summit gave none of us vertigo
(although the fog may have disguised the danger). Nonetheless, the summit
impressed all of us. The lookout had full accommodations: bed, pen, paper,
cards, rope, harness, etc. However, I'm not sure I would trust the blankets and
dishware; and the whole area smelled of old feces. The "bathroom" was close by.

Surprisingly, it took us four and a half hours to get down. We beat our ascent
by a mere half hour! The distance did not seem excessive on the way up, but
everyone's legs began to fail them on the way down. Fortunately that made the
car even better, and the drinks we hid in the bushes tasted heavenly. We had
made it down the mountain by 5:30.
