---
layout: default
title: Horse Shoe  Basin
author: Michael Schmitz
category: outdoors
---

This weekend Lia and I traveled as far as we could, and we managed to find the
only place in Washington with mountains and without rain! Horseshoe Basin lies
in the Pasayten Wilderness, not far from the town of Loomis and the Canadian
Border in Okanagan County. Past Loomis the road degenerates into unmaintained,
pot-hole ridden asphault and then we turned right toward the Iron Gate Trail
onto a dirt road spotten with large rocks. Every few minutes we had to scare
cows away so we could keep moving forward. I prayed that when we came back
there would not be any cows sleeping on the road.

At the end of the road, however, we were surprised to see a rather developed
parking lot. It was even equipped with outhouses and a trash can! The trail to
horseshoe basin maintained an easy grade the whole way, although it actually
starts sloping downwards for about a mile. Moreover, it slopes through a dead
and desolate burnt forest. We asked some people maintaining the trails and they
said the fire had hit the previous year. Nature has barely made any recovery
since then.

We continued all the way to Ladin lake (unmarked in the basin, but it was the
only lake I saw other than Smith Lake) which is at the foot of Armstrong Peak
and Rocky Mountain. Our map listed a trail climbing Armstrong Peak to the
Canadian border, but as far as we could tell no such trail existed. We set out
toward what we thought was Armstrong Peak, but we never found a monument. Later
I learned that this was Arnold Peak, and we had passed Armstrong Peak by on the
way!

Fortunately Armstrong Peak was my second guess, and we easily found the
Canadian border. I was amazed to see the line, the International Border
Committee maintains a 6 meter line between Canada and the United States!
