---
layout: default
title: Email Setup
author: Michael Schmitz
category: linux
---

# Email Setup

Most users think email is simple. This page outlines my (rather complicated)
email setup. The basic idea is that I use getmail to download my emails from a
POP server. Getmail downloads these emails and sends them to procmail, which
then forwards the emails to folders depending on their attributes (and the user
supplied conditionals). Finally the emails end up in the users Maildir
directory, from which they can be viewed using a mail reader such as mutt.

There are a few different types of mailbox formats, most notably mbox and
Maildir. I use Maildir, mostly for arbitrary reasons. The Wikipedia and 'man
mbox' are a good places to start reading about the differences.

## Getmail
[Getmail](http://pyropus.ca/software/getmail/) is the program I use to receive
my email from a pop server. To add an account, I put a file in ~/.getmail (I
will refer to it as ~/getmail/file for this section) with information such as
the following.

```
[options]
read_all = false
delete = false

[retriever]
type = SimplePOP3SSLRetriever
server = mail.mailserver.somewhere
username = username
port = 995
password = password

[destination]
type = MDA_external
path = /usr/bin/procmail
unixfrom = true
```

Setting read_all and delete to false ensure that only new email messages are downloaded and that the messages are not deleted from the server. The middle section concerns the account information, and the last section informs getmail to send its mail to procmail. I can now download my mail by executing `getmail -r ~/.getmail/file`.

## Bogofilter
[Bogofilter](http://bogofilter.sourceforge.net/) is a simple spam filter based
on Bayesian networks. It learns the difference between spam and ham based a
test set that is supplied by a human. A good way to start teaching your
bogofilter is to run the command `cat FOLDER/* | bogofilter -s` on a FOLDER
that contains all spam emails and `cat FOLDER/* | bogofilter -n` on a FOLDER
that contains all ham (not spam) emails.

## Procmail
[Procmail](http://www.procmail.org/ Procmail) is a program that is used to sort
email into different folders. I use it to send all incoming mail to bogofilter,
and then putting the mail into the appropriate folder depending on whether it
is spam or not. The following is my `~/.procmailrc`.

```
# Variables
DROPPRIVS=yes
LINEBUF=8192
PATH=$HOME/bin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/local/sbin
SHELL="/bin/sh"

# Mail directory variables
MAILDIR =$HOME/mail
INBOX =$MAILDIR/spool/
SAVE =$MAILDIR/inbox/
SPAM =$MAILDIR/spam/
ARCHIVE =$MAILDIR/archive/

# How to sort the email
:0
{
  :0fw
  | /usr/bin/bogofilter -p -e
  :0
  * ^X-Bogosity:.(Spam|Yes)
  ${SPAM}
  :0
  * ^X-Bogosity:.(Ham|Unsure|No)
  {
   :0 c
   ${ARCHIVE}
   :0
   ${INBOX}
  }
}
```

The first sections set some variables. The only confusing part is that the
paths (INBOX, SAVE, etc.) use mbox format if there is no trailing slash, and
Maildir if there is a trailing slash. I have a trailing slash because I am
using Maildir format.

The last section sends the email to bogofilter and then sorts the mail
depending on the results (whether the mail is spam or ham). If it is spam, it
is only put into the SPAM folder. If it is ham (not spam), then it is placed in
both ARCHIVE and INBOX.
