---
layout: default
title: Cob
author: Michael Schmitz
category: food
---

# 5/21/2017

We started the cob oven just before noon, removed the coals around 3:30, and
then baked three loaves of bread when the floor temperature reached 550 F (at
4:00).  We soaked the door in water for 15 minutes just before baking the
bread.  The bread baked beautifully and took 40-45 minutes, developing a
beatiful dark crust and a fine and chewy (perfect) crumb.

When the temperature got to around 450 F, we pre-heated a skillet and baked
four cookies.  We then left the door open to help the oven cool.

At 350 F we put in the vegetables (leeks wrapped in foil and bell peppers,
onions, and garlic heads in a covered dutch oven) and the ribs, but we left the
ribs covered for an hour because the temperature was high.  Every 30-45
minutes, we rotated the ribs and poured some beer on them.  We baked the ribs
for a solid three hours (5:30 to 8:30).  The ribs were wonderful, but would
have been more tender with another hour or two.  The vegetables in the dutch
oven boiled in their own juices--we will leave the lid off next time.

# 3/27/2016

We stoked the cob oven from 8 to 12:30 and then cooked:

* 11 pizzas, starting 800 degrees and ending near 500 degrees
* 3 loaves of bread
* 2 dutch ovens of cinammon rolls
* Ribs, a pot of beans, and potatos

The bread browned quickly, but baked excellently.  The ribs cooked well, but we
could have left them in for another hours (they were only in the oven for
around 2 hours.

The beans and potatos were underdone.  The beans didn't cook well because I had
added tomato.  The potatos did not get hot enough--next time I would put them
in at bread temperature.  I put the potatos back in the oven overnight.  In the
morning they were hot to the touch but still not always fully cooked.  Potatos
need it hot!

I also learned that the potatos need to be removed from the foil immediately
after being taken out of the oven.  Otherwise they get soggy.  I'd like to try
cooking them in the oven without foil.

# 7/4/2015

We stoked the cob oven for 3 1/2 hours and then cooked:

* 8 pizzas with 8 ears of corn on the sides
* Roasted some garlic and cooked root vegetables
* 2 loaves of bread
* Cinammon rolls
* Pulled pork and beans

Everything cooked excellently.  The corn can go in immediately after the fire
is removed.
